Ayhemìri ’ewana tsanantangur ahì’i tìng nari. | Look at what that little young viperwolf is doing.
Ayoengal fte Faysawtutet kivurakx, zene nì’awve ayfot tslivam. | We must understand these Sky People if we are to drive them out.
Ayuvan letokx ’o’ lu nìtxan. | Sports are great fun.
Entul Peyralit fìtxan flolel kuma fpìl poe san oe yawne lu por. | Entu fooled Peyral so much that she thought he loved her.
Fko plltxeie san menga muntxa slolu sìk! Seykxel sì nitram! Slä lu oeru fmokx nì’it. | I’m so happy to hear you got married! Congratulations! I am a little envious, though.
Fo kelku si few ’ora. | They live on the opposite side of the lake.
Fol fte ayspe’etut livonu fngo’ ’upet? | What are they demanding in order for them to release the captives?
Fpole’ ayngal oer a ’upxare. | The message you have sent me.
Fralo a taron, oeyä ’itan txopu si nìnänän. | Each time he hunts, my son becomes less and less afraid.
Fula horen sì aylì’fyavi amip lesar sayi mengar oeti nitram ’eykefu nìtxan. | It makes me very happy that the new rules and words are useful to the two of you.
Furia fìlì’fyavit fkol ta ’Ìnglìsì molunge, sìlpey oe tsnì ayhapxìtu lì’fyaolo’ä awngeyä ke stìyevi. | That this expression is brought from English, will hopefully not anger the members of the language group.
Furia ’llngo ngeyä zoslu, ’efu oe nitram nì’aw. | I’m just happy that your hip is getting better.
Fwa tse’a peyä tìfkeytokit lefkrr lolängu oer ’asap nìngay. | It was a real shock to me to see him in his current condition.
Fìatxkxeti ke raya’un ayoel kawkrr! | We will never give up this land.
Fìrewon tompameyp zarmup, slä set ’ìmeko nìtxan nang. | It was drizzling this morning, but it’s really started coming down now!
Fìuvanìri lu ngaru pxen nì’aw. | You only get three guesses in this game.
Ha ftxey ’awpot a ayngakip. | So choose one among you.
Hufwa lu filur Va’ruä fnefe’ranvi, tsalsungay fpìl futa sayrìp lu nìtxan. | Although Va’ru’s facial stripes are rather uneven, I still think he’s very handsome.
Karyul fngolo’ futa aynumeyu pivate ye’krr. | The teacher required the students to arrive early.
Kawkrr ke lu peyä ayvur ’ipu kaw’it. | His stories are never a bit amusing.
Ke new oe mivay’ tsnganti a ’olem Rinil. | I don’t want to taste the meat that Rini cooked.
Ke tsun oe fì’awkxit tsyivìl. | I can’t scale this cliff.
Ke tsun tute a’aw tsatskxeti aku’up kxiveltek nì’awtu. | One person alone can’t lift that heavy rock.
Ke zene win säpivi. ’Ivong nìk’ong. | Take your time; don’t rush. Slow is fine.
Ketsran tute nivew hivum, poru plltxe san rutxe ’ivì’awn. | No matter who wants to leave, tell them to please stay.
Krro lu ’Ìnglìsì txur nìhawng mì re’o. | Sometimes English is too strong in (my) head.
Kxawm set ’u angäzìk frato lu la’a ayll. | Maybe the most difficult thing now is social distance.
Loakìl pänutolìng futa kar oeru fya’ot a ’ìp fko nemfa ewll. | Loak promised he’d teach me how to vanish into the bushes.
Lolu poru txukxa skxir a ftu ’etnaw askien ne mepun aftär. | It had a deep wound from its right shoulder to its two left arms.
Lu por mokri amiklor, slä loreyu ’awnampi lu. Ke tsun rivol eo sute. | She has a beautiful voice, but she’s extremely shy. She can’t sing in front of people.
Lì’fyari leNa’vi oel ’efu ayngeyä tìyawnit. | I feel your love for the Na’vi language.
Maw kxitx sempulä larmängu Peyralä afpawng txewluke. | After her father’s death, Peyral’s grief was endless.
Menga lu oeyä ’eylan. | You two are my friends.
Mo’at alu Tsahìk lu Omatikayaä le’awa hapxìtu a ioi säpi fa ’are. | Mo’at, the Tsahik, is the only member of the Omatikaya who wears a poncho.
Na seze - A ’ong ne tsawke. | Like the blue flower - Which unfolds to the sun.
Ne ’oratsyìp polähem, yak si nìftär. | When you arrive at the pond, turn to the left.
Neytiril nantangit tsolukx fte peyä tìsrawti ’eykivi’a. | Neytiri stabbed the viperwolf to end its pain.
Ngal molay’ pxawpxunit Loakä a krr pekxinum? | When you tried on Loak’s armband, how tight was it?
Ngal ’erawnìm oeti srak? | Are you avoiding me?
Ngari hu Eywa salew tirea, tokx ’ì’awn slu Na’viyä hapxì. | Your spirit goes with Eywa, your body remains to become part of the People.
Ngari leiu oeru nrra nìtxan, ma ’ite. | I’m very proud of you, daughter.
Ngari txo fìkem sivi fìfya, krrti ’avun. | If you do it like this, you’ll save time.
Ngeyä tìkangkemìri ’efeiu oe ye nìtxan. | I’m very satisfied with your work.
Nìlun ayioi a’eoio ayeyktanä lu lor frato. | Of course the ceremonial wardrobes of the leaders are the most beautiful.
Nìran lu Loak mi ’eveng slä tsun tivaron nìtengfya na fyeyntu. | Loak is still really just a boy but he can hunt the same as an adult.
Oe alu Tsahìk ke tsun mìftxele tsngivawvìk; oe alu sa’nok tsun. | As Tsahik, I cannot weep over this matter; as a mother, I can.
Oe ’asap soli krra tsafmawnit stawm. | I was startled when I heard the news.
Oe ’olongokx mì sray a txampayìri sim. | I was born in a town near the ocean.
Oe ’on si tskxeru fte na ikran livam. | I shape a rock to look like an ikran.
Oel ronsrelngop futa Eywevengit tok. | I imagine that I’m on Pandora.
Oel tse’a ’a’awa tutet. | I see several people.
Oel vewng futa ayeveng nivume teri ayewll na’rìngä. | I see to it that the children learn about the forest plants.
Oel yolom ’awlie teylut. |I once ate teylu.
Pam fì’otxangä sunu oer nìngay. | I really like the sound of this instrument.
Peyralìl zet wura wutsot a’awnem pxel sngel. | Peyral treats a cool cooked meal like garbage.
Peyä ’itanìri lu hona nìtxan a fì’u law lu frapor. | It’s clear to everyone that his son is very cute.
Poel oeti larmawk. | She was talking about me.
Pot ’aku fìtsengta! | Get him out of here!
Ralu rìkxi krra srew, rì’ìr si palukanur a lu alaksi fte spivä. | Ralu does a shake while dancing, imitating a thanator that’s ready to leap.
Rutxe mehawnvenit ’ivaku. | Please take off your shoes.
Rutxe, ayngari fìkem feyä ’e’ala topur kangay sìyi nì’aw. | Please, this will only confirm their worst fears about you.
Sevina tsa’everu ahì’i sa’sem ioi soli fa miktsang. | The parents put earrings on that pretty little girl.
Slä ayevi nìwotx tsolun tslivam (pot). | But all children could understand (her).
Slä fìfya tsafya, ngari tireal tsatsenget tayok. | But one way or the other your spirit will be there.
Srake kolä nga ’awliene Nu Yorkì? | Have you ever been to New York?
Srane, lì’ul alu mì frakrr leykatem lì’ut ahay tsafya. | Yes, the word mì always changes the next word like that.
Säplltxeviri alahe, lu lì’fyavi ngeyä eyawr, lu pum oeyä eyawr nìteng. | Concerning the other comment, your expression is correct, mine is correct as well.
Tengkrr palulukan moene kxll sarmi, poltxe Neytiril aylì’ut a frakrr ’ok seyä layu oer. | As the thanator was charging towards the two of us, Neytiri said something I will always remember.
Tsap’alute, mì upxare a fpole’ oel ayngaru trram lu kxeyey. | Apologies, in the message that I sent you yesterday was a mistake.
Tsayerik terul ne ’awkx. Spä skxawng sìn ’ana aflì. | That hexapede is running toward the cliff. Only a fool jumps onto a thin vine.
Tsayeriktsyìpìl li ’anla sa’nokit. | That little hexapede is already yearning for its mother.
Tsa’opin hek nì’it, slä sunu oer, ha ha’. | That color is bit odd, but I like it, so it’s a good fit for me.
Tsenga ’awstengyäpem fìmekemyo lu mektseng a tsun fpxiväkìm hì’ang tsawìlä. | Where these two walls come together there’s a gap through which insects can get in.
Tseyk ’äpeykamrrko äo utral a zolup fte hivifwo ftu aysre’ palulukanä. | Jake rolled under the fallen tree to escape from the thanator’s teeth.
Tsun fko ayonti fìwopxä nivìn fte yafkeykit sresive’a. | The shapes of clouds can be used to predict the weather.
Txantstew säro’a si, fnawe’tu ke si. | A hero does great deeds, a coward does not.
Tìfläri lolu po ’älek. | She was determined to succeed.
Tìkan fìpayoangä ke lu fwa tsun fko pot yivom; lu oeyä ’eylyong. | This fish is not meant to be eaten; it’s my pet.
Tìtaronìri längu tìkakpam fekum. Kin fkol frainanfyat. | I’m sorry to say that deafness is a disadvantage for hunting. You need all your senses.
Tìtusaronìri fte flivä, zene fko sivutx smarit ninan nìno. | To succeed at hunting, you have to track your prey by reading (the forest) with attention to detail.
Tì’eyngit oel tolel a krr, ayngaru payeng, tsakrr paye’un sweya fya’ot a zamivunge oel ayngar aylì’ut horentisì lì’fyayä leNa’vi. | When I’ve received an answer, I will tell you and then decide on the best way to bring you the words and rules of the Na’vi language.
Utral a lu few payfya a eo kelku oeyä tsawl lu nìtxan. | The tree on the other side of the stream in front of my house is very tall.
Wä fìsäspxin a ’umtsa leiu set tsukanom. | Medicine against this disease is happily now available.
Zene fko ’ivampi prrnenit nìflrr frakrr. | One must always touch a baby gently.
Zene oe ’awsiteng tìkangkem sivi fohu. | I must work together with them.
awngal yom fkxenti lerìk nìwotx | We eat leafy vegetable-food.
tì’eyngit oel tolel a krr, ayngaru payeng | when I have received an answer, I will tell you.
’Ali’ät vulsìn keykur za’u fìtseng. | Hang the choker on the branch and come here.
’Angtsìk a kxap si lu lehrrap, ma ’itan. | A threatening hammerhead is dangerous, son.
’Awa tìpawmìri ’iveyng oe set; aylari zusawkrr ’ayeyng. Let me answer one of the questions now; the others (I’ll) answer in the future.
’En si oe, Sawtuteol tìlmok fìtsengit. | I guess some Skypeople were just here.
’Evengìl fìrelit ’opinsolung fa pinvul areypaytun. | The child colored (in) this picture with a red crayon.
’Onìri tskoä lu tìkin sälatemä ahì’i. | The form of the bow requires a small change.
’Uo a fpi rey’eng Eywa’evengmì, ’Rrtamì tsranten nìtxan awngaru nìwotx. | Something that matters a lot to all of us for the sake of The Balance of Life on both Pandora and Earth.
’Ä’ ! Oel tsngalit tìmungzup. | Whoops! I just dropped the cup.
’Ìn nga fyape nìfkrr? | What’s been keeping you busy lately?
’Ì’awn alìm! | Stay back!
