awngal yom fkxenti lerìk nìwotx | We eat leafy vegetable-food.
Oel tse’a ’a’awa tutet. | I see several people.
Fpole’ ayngal oer a ’upxare. | The message you have sent me.
Rutxe mehawnvenit ’ivaku. | Please take off your shoes.
Pot ’aku fìtsengta! | Get him out of here!
Fo kelku si few ’ora. | They live on the opposite side of the lake.
’Ali’ät vulsìn keykur za’u fìtseng. | Hang the choker on the branch and come here.
Zene fko ’ivampi prrnenit nìflrr frakrr. | One must always touch a baby gently.
Tsayerik terul ne ’awkx. Spä skxawng sìn ’ana aflì. | That hexapede is running toward the cliff. Only a fool jumps onto a thin vine.
Tsayeriktsyìpìl li ’anla sa’nokit. | That little hexapede is already yearning for its mother.
’Angtsìk a kxap si lu lehrrap, ma ’itan. | A threatening hammerhead is dangerous, son.
Mo’at alu Tsahìk lu Omatikayaä le’awa hapxìtu a ioi säpi fa ’are. | Mo’at, the Tsahik, is the only member of the Omatikaya who wears a poncho.
Fwa tse’a peyä tìfkeytokit lefkrr lolängu oer ’asap nìngay. | It was a real shock to me to see him in his current condition.
Oe ’asap soli krra tsafmawnit stawm. | I was startled when I heard the news.
Ngari txo fìkem sivi fìfya, krrti ’avun. | If you do it like this, you’ll save time.
Ke tsun tute a’aw tsatskxeti aku’up kxiveltek nì’awtu. | One person alone can’t lift that heavy rock.
Ke tsun oe fì’awkxit tsyivìl. | I can’t scale this cliff.
Oel yolom ’awlie teylut. |I once ate teylu.
Srake kolä nga ’awliene Nu Yorkì? | Have you ever been to New York?
Ngal ’erawnìm oeti srak? | Are you avoiding me?
Ha ftxey ’awpot a ayngakip. | So choose one among you.
Zene oe ’awsiteng tìkangkem sivi fohu. | I must work together with them.
’Ä’ ! Oel tsngalit tìmungzup. | Whoops! I just dropped the cup.
Tìfläri lolu po ’älek. | She was determined to succeed.
Rutxe, ayngari fìkem feyä ’e’ala topur kangay sìyi nì’aw. | Please, this will only confirm their worst fears about you.
Lì’fyari leNa’vi oel ’efu ayngeyä tìyawnit. | I feel your love for the Na’vi language.
Ngeyä tìkangkemìri ’efeiu oe ye nìtxan. | I’m very satisfied with your work.
Fula horen sì aylì’fyavi amip lesar sayi mengar oeti nitram ’eykefu nìtxan. | It makes me very happy that the new rules and words are useful to the two of you.
Fìrewon tompameyp zarmup, slä set ’ìmeko nìtxan nang. | It was drizzling this morning, but it’s really started coming down now!
Ngal molay’ pxawpxunit Loakä a krr pekxinum? | When you tried on Loak’s armband, how tight was it?
Ke new oe mivay’ tsnganti a ’olem Rinil. | I don’t want to taste the meat that Rini cooked.
Peyralìl zet wura wutsot a’awnem pxel sngel. | Peyral treats a cool cooked meal like garbage.
Fìuvanìri lu ngaru pxen nì’aw. | You only get three guesses in this game.
’En si oe, Sawtuteol tìlmok fìtsengit. | I guess some Skypeople were just here.
Nìlun ayioi a’eoio ayeyktanä lu lor frato. | Of course the ceremonial wardrobes of the leaders are the most beautiful.
Lolu poru txukxa skxir a ftu ’etnaw askien ne mepun aftär. | It had a deep wound from its right shoulder to its two left arms.
Sevina tsa’everu ahì’i sa’sem ioi soli fa miktsang. | The parents put earrings on that pretty little girl.
Nìran lu Loak mi ’eveng slä tsun tivaron nìtengfya na fyeyntu. | Loak is still really just a boy but he can hunt the same as an adult.
Slä ayevi nìwotx tsolun tslivam (pot). | But all children could understand (her).
Ayhemìri ’ewana tsanantangur ahì’i tìng nari. | Look at what that little young viperwolf is doing.
Loakìl pänutolìng futa kar oeru fya’ot a ’ìp fko nemfa ewll. | Loak promised he’d teach me how to vanish into the bushes.
Oel vewng futa ayeveng nivume teri ayewll na’rìngä. | I see to it that the children learn about the forest plants.
Menga lu oeyä ’eylan. | You two are my friends.
Tìkan fìpayoangä ke lu fwa tsun fko pot yivom; lu oeyä ’eylyong. | This fish is not meant to be eaten; it’s my pet.
’Awa tìpawmìri ’iveyng oe set; aylari zusawkrr ’ayeyng. Let me answer one of the questions now; the others (I’ll) answer in the future.
Neytiril nantangit tsolukx fte peyä tìsrawti ’eykivi’a. | Neytiri stabbed the viperwolf to end its pain.
Kawkrr ke lu peyä ayvur ’ipu kaw’it. | His stories are never a bit amusing.
Fralo a taron, oeyä ’itan txopu si nìnänän. | Each time he hunts, my son becomes less and less afraid.
Peyä ’itanìri lu hona nìtxan a fì’u law lu frapor. | It’s clear to everyone that his son is very cute.
Ngari leiu oeru nrra nìtxan, ma ’ite. | I’m very proud of you, daughter.
Ngari hu Eywa salew tirea, tokx ’ì’awn slu Na’viyä hapxì. | Your spirit goes with Eywa, your body remains to become part of the People.
’Ì’awn alìm! | Stay back!
Ketsran tute nivew hivum, poru plltxe san rutxe ’ivì’awn. | No matter who wants to leave, tell them to please stay.
’Ìn nga fyape nìfkrr? | What’s been keeping you busy lately?
Krro lu ’Ìnglìsì txur nìhawng mì re’o. | Sometimes English is too strong in (my) head.
Furia fìlì’fyavit fkol ta ’Ìnglìsì molunge, sìlpey oe tsnì ayhapxìtu lì’fyaolo’ä awngeyä ke stìyevi. | That this expression is brought from English, will hopefully not anger the members of the language group.
Furia ’llngo ngeyä zoslu, ’efu oe nitram nì’aw. | I’m just happy that your hip is getting better.
Ayuvan letokx ’o’ lu nìtxan. | Sports are great fun.
Tengkrr palulukan moene kxll sarmi, poltxe Neytiril aylì’ut a frakrr ’ok seyä layu oer. | As the thanator was charging towards the two of us, Neytiri said something I will always remember.
Tsun fko ayonti fìwopxä nivìn fte yafkeykit sresive’a. | The shapes of clouds can be used to predict the weather.
’Onìri tskoä lu tìkin sälatemä ahì’i. | The form of the bow requires a small change.
Oe ’on si tskxeru fte na ikran livam. | I shape a rock to look like an ikran.
Ke zene win säpivi. ’Ivong nìk’ong. | Take your time; don’t rush. Slow is fine.
Na seze - A ’ong ne tsawke. | Like the blue flower - Which unfolds to the sun.
Oe ’olongokx mì sray a txampayìri sim. | I was born in a town near the ocean.
Tsa’opin hek nì’it, slä sunu oer, ha ha’. | That color is bit odd, but I like it, so it’s a good fit for me.
’Evengìl fìrelit ’opinsolung fa pinvul areypaytun. | The child colored (in) this picture with a red crayon.
Ne ’oratsyìp polähem, yak si nìftär. | When you arrive at the pond, turn to the left.
Pam fì’otxangä sunu oer nìngay. | I really like the sound of this instrument.
Tseyk ’äpeykamrrko äo utral a zolup fte hivifwo ftu aysre’ palulukanä. | Jake rolled under the fallen tree to escape from the thanator’s teeth.
Kxawm set ’u angäzìk frato lu la’a ayll. | Maybe the most difficult thing now is social distance.
Lu por mokri amiklor, slä loreyu ’awnampi lu. Ke tsun rivol eo sute. | She has a beautiful voice, but she’s extremely shy. She can’t sing in front of people.
Tìtaronìri längu tìkakpam fekum. Kin fkol frainanfyat. | I’m sorry to say that deafness is a disadvantage for hunting. You need all your senses.
Tsenga ’awstengyäpem fìmekemyo lu mektseng a tsun fpxiväkìm hì’ang tsawìlä. | Where these two walls come together there’s a gap through which insects can get in.
Tsap’alute, mì upxare a fpole’ oel ayngaru trram lu kxeyey. | Apologies, in the message that I sent you yesterday was a mistake.
Ayoengal fte Faysawtutet kivurakx, zene nì’awve ayfot tslivam. | We must understand these Sky People if we are to drive them out.
’Uo a fpi rey’eng Eywa’evengmì, ’Rrtamì tsranten nìtxan awngaru nìwotx. | Something that matters a lot to all of us for the sake of The Balance of Life on both Pandora and Earth.
Wä fìsäspxin a ’umtsa leiu set tsukanom. | Medicine against this disease is happily now available.
Maw kxitx sempulä larmängu Peyralä afpawng txewluke. | After her father’s death, Peyral’s grief was endless.
tì’eyngit oel tolel a krr, ayngaru payeng | when I have received an answer, I will tell you.
Ralu rìkxi krra srew, rì’ìr si palukanur a lu alaksi fte spivä. | Ralu does a shake while dancing, imitating a thanator that’s ready to leap.
Srane, lì’ul alu mì frakrr leykatem lì’ut ahay tsafya. | Yes, the word mì always changes the next word like that.
Oe alu Tsahìk ke tsun mìftxele tsngivawvìk; oe alu sa’nok tsun. | As Tsahik, I cannot weep over this matter; as a mother, I can.
Tì’eyngit oel tolel a krr, ayngaru payeng, tsakrr paye’un sweya fya’ot a zamivunge oel ayngar aylì’ut horentisì lì’fyayä leNa’vi. | When I’ve received an answer, I will tell you and then decide on the best way to bring you the words and rules of the Na’vi language.
Utral a lu few payfya a eo kelku oeyä tsawl lu nìtxan. | The tree on the other side of the stream in front of my house is very tall.
Säplltxeviri alahe, lu lì’fyavi ngeyä eyawr, lu pum oeyä eyawr nìteng. | Concerning the other comment, your expression is correct, mine is correct as well.
Hufwa lu filur Va’ruä fnefe’ranvi, tsalsungay fpìl futa sayrìp lu nìtxan. | Although Va’ru’s facial stripes are rather uneven, I still think he’s very handsome.
Fko plltxeie san menga muntxa slolu sìk! Seykxel sì nitram! Slä lu oeru fmokx nì’it. | I’m so happy to hear you got married! Congratulations! I am a little envious, though.
Tìtusaronìri fte flivä, zene fko sivutx smarit ninan nìno. | To succeed at hunting, you have to track your prey by reading (the forest) with attention to detail.
Fol fte ayspe’etut livonu fngo’ ’upet? | What are they demanding in order for them to release the captives?
Entul Peyralit fìtxan flolel kuma fpìl poe san oe yawne lu por. | Entu fooled Peyral so much that she thought he loved her.
Karyul fngolo’ futa aynumeyu pivate ye’krr. | The teacher required the students to arrive early.
Txantstew säro’a si, fnawe’tu ke si. | A hero does great deeds, a coward does not.
Fìatxkxeti ke raya’un ayoel kawkrr! | We will never give up this land.
Tsavur feyä ayeltur tìtxen soli. | They found that story interesting.
Oel ronsrelngop futa Eywevengit tok. | I imagine that I’m on Pandora.
Slä fìfya tsafya, ngari tireal tsatsenget tayok. | But one way or the other your spirit will be there.
Poel oeti larmawk. | She was talking about me.
